Manual Test case - check-audio-privacy-during-D3 (#1276)
thesofproject/sof-test: test-case/manual/check-audio-privacy-during-D3.md

# Verify audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during D3
Verify audio privacy (hard mute) functionality in Linux in D3 state

## Preconditions

> 1. The RVP should have active audio endpoints.

Author: for platforms that have audio privacy functionality

2. The RVP should have a functional hard mute switch or toggle.
3. Enable BIOS settings:
   * Microphone Privacy Mode = "HW managed Microphone Privacy"
   * Enable corresponding codec options, e.g., SNDW#3 [x] for SoundWire.
   * Enable DMIC option, e.g., DMIC [x] for DMIC
4. Make sure UCM is up to date
   * Copy the ucm and ucm2 trees to the alsa-lib configuration directory (usually located in /usr/share/alsa) including symlinks
   * Reference: https://github.com/alsa-project/alsa-ucm-conf/

## Test Description

> * Verification of audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during suspension in d3 state in linux system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Verification of audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during suspension in D3 state in Linux system.
```

* Should not capture audio samples when the audio privacy switch is turned ON during d3 state.
* Should capture audio samples when the audio privacy switch is turned OFF during d3 state.

## Steps to Execute
1. System is booted in the OS
2. Capture audio via 3.5mm jack ports:
    ```bash
    arecord -Dhw:0,0 -c 2 -r 48000 -f S16_LE /tmp/test_sample_mute_during_d3.wav -vvv
    ```

> 3. Enter D3 state via command: sudo rtcwake -m mem -s "${sleep_lst[$i]}"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter D3 state via command: 
```bash
sudo rtcwake -m mem -seconds 120"
```

4. Turn ON the audio privacy switch. Led indicator should be turned ON.
5. Exit D3 state, check on the file if audio was muted in D3 state
6. Capture audio via 3.5mm jack ports:
    ```bash
    arecord -Dhw:0,0 -c 2 -r 48000 -f S16_LE /tmp/test_sample_unmute_during_d3.wav -vvv
    ```

> 7. Enter D3 state via command: sudo rtcwake -m mem -s "${sleep_lst[$i]}"

Author: changed to 30 sec, i don't think that longer sleep is necessary

8. Turn OFF the audio privacy switch. Led indicator should be turned OFF.
9. Exit D3 state, check on the file if audio was unmuted in D3 state
10. Check the dmesg log.

## Expected Results
1. No dmesg errors, jack device should be visible in system.
2. Recording should start without problems.

> 3. System should enter D3 state.

Reviewer: `D3` is device power state, system states are `S*` sleep states (see also my comments on `rtcwake --mode` parameter)

# Verify audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during DSP D3 state
Verify audio privacy (hard mute) functionality when DSP is in D3 state

## Preconditions
1. The RVP must have active audio endpoints.
2. The RVP must have a functional hard mute switch or toggle.
3. Enable BIOS settings:
   * Microphone Privacy Mode = "HW managed Microphone Privacy"
   * Enable corresponding codec options, e.g., SNDW#3 [x] for SoundWire.
   * Enable DMIC option, e.g., DMIC [x] for DMIC
4. Make sure UCM is up to date
   * Copy the ucm and ucm2 trees to the alsa-lib configuration directory (usually located in /usr/share/alsa) including symlinks
   * Reference: https://github.com/alsa-project/alsa-ucm-conf/

## Test Description
* Verification of audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during DSP D3 state in linux system.
* Must not capture audio samples when the audio privacy switch is turned ON when DSP was in D3 state.
* Must capture audio samples when the audio privacy switch is turned OFF when DSP was in D3 state.

## Steps to Execute
1. System is booted in the OS
2. Run command in second terminal to monitor changes of DSP state via command:
    ```bash

>     watch -n 1 "dmesg | grep DSP"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   journalctl -f -g DSP 
```
Or, if you insist on using `dmesg` for some unknown reason:

```suggestion
   dmesg -w | grep DSP
```

Either way don't use `watch`

Reviewer 3: there is a tool to check status: https://github.com/thesofproject/sof-test/blob/main/tools/sof-dump-status.py
`sof-dump-status.py --dsp_status 0`

    ```
    By default DSP is in D3 state and after interrupt (play or record new wav file, DSP wakes up and is in active state D0I0)
3. Make sure that DSP is in D3 state, then turn ON the audio privacy switch. Led indicator must be turned ON.
4. Capture audio via 3.5mm jack ports:
    ```bash

>     arecord -Dhw:0,0 -c 2 -r 48000 -f S16_LE /tmp/test_sample_mute_during_d3.wav -vvv

Reviewer 2: Still hardcoded https://github.com/thesofproject/sof-test/pull/1276#discussion_r2138661923

Author: changed to -Ddefault

Reviewer 2: Like pretty much everything else, there is already context about this:
- #292 

As usual, I forgot about it and found while searching for something else.

Whatever you do: search first.

# Verify audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during D3 state
Verify audio privacy (hard mute) functionality in Linux in D3 state

## Preconditions
1. The RVP should have active audio endpoints.
2. The RVP should have a functional hard mute switch or toggle.
3. Enable BIOS settings:
   * Microphone Privacy Mode = "HW managed Microphone Privacy"
   * Enable corresponding codec options, e.g., SNDW#3 [x] for SoundWire.
   * Enable DMIC option, e.g., DMIC [x] for DMIC
4. Make sure UCM is up to date
   * Copy the ucm and ucm2 trees to the alsa-lib configuration directory (usually located in /usr/share/alsa) including symlinks
   * Reference: https://github.com/alsa-project/alsa-ucm-conf/

## Test Description
* Verification of audio privacy (hard mute) functionality during suspension in D3 state in linux system.
* Should not capture audio samples when the audio privacy switch is turned ON during D3 state.
* Should capture audio samples when the audio privacy switch is turned OFF during D3 state.

## Steps to Execute
1. System is booted in the OS
2. Capture audio via 3.5mm jack ports:
    ```bash

>     arecord -Dhw:0,0 -c 2 -r 48000 -f S16_LE /tmp/test_sample_mute_during_d3.wav -vvv

Reviewer 2: `-Dhw:0,0` may or may not be correct. It would be better to go through `pulse` or whatever audio daemon is running.

    ```
3. Enter D3 state via command:
    ```bash
    sudo rtcwake -m mem --seconds 30
    ```
4. Turn ON the audio privacy switch. Led indicator should be turned ON.

> 5. Exit D3 state, check on the file if audio was muted in D3 state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Exit D3 state, listen to the file and check that audio was 1. actually recorded before D3, 2. muted in D3 state
```

If there is no audio in 1. (which is very common because Linux audio configuration is incredibly difficult to get right), then 2. does not prove anything. So, 1. is critical.

6. Capture audio via 3.5mm jack ports:
    ```bash
    arecord -Dhw:0,0 -c 2 -r 48000 -f S16_LE /tmp/test_sample_unmute_during_d3.wav -vvv
    ```
7. Enter D3 state via command:
    ```bash
    sudo rtcwake -m mem --seconds 30
    ```
8. Turn OFF the audio privacy switch. Led indicator should be turned OFF.
9. Exit D3 state, check on the file if audio was unmuted in D3 state
10. Check the dmesg log.

## Expected Results
1. No dmesg errors, jack device should be visible in system.
2. Recording should start without problems.
3. Device should enter D3 state.

> 4. The MIC mute LED should glow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The MIC mute LED must glow.
```
If you want the manual test to either "pass" or "fail", then there is no room for "should".

BTW on all my devices the LED glows when the microphone is NOT on mute...

5. The microphone is completely disabled during D3 state, and no audio is captured or transmitted.
6. Recording should start without problems.
7. Device should enter D3 state.
8. The MIC mute LED should turn OFF.
9. The microphone is completely enabled during D3 state, resuming normal functionality, capturing and transmitting audio.

> 10. No audio errors or failures should be present in the dmesg log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. No audio errors or failures must be present in the logs.
```
